---
layout: post
title: Project 1 Blog Post
---
 
 [Here is a link to my Project 1 Github page](https://koltonw.github.io/ST558Project1/)
 
 For this project, I made functions to pull data about the NHL from two different API's, one with records and one with stats. The functions are meant to be user-friendly and accept input for any NHL team. After making these initial functions, I made a wrapper function that allows the user to input any of the previous functions (along with team names, IDs, modifiers) and have the data parsed back in a readable way. 
 
 After the initial setup, I explored and analyzed some of the data I returned. I joined some data from both the records and stats API's and used this new dataset to create new varaibles, such as penalty minutes per game, goal differential, win percentage, shutout percentage, and shootout win percentage. I then created some contingency tables and numeric summaries with the new variables I had created and some previous categorical variables already in the data set. For the contingency tables, I looked at a breakdown of the format of conferences and divisions in the NHL, as well as looking at how the roster of the St. Louis Blues was made up. The numeric summaries looked at penalty minutes per game broken down by regular season vs playoffs and by conferences and divisions, as well as the shutout percentage variable based on conference and division. 
 
 Next, I created several plots. First, I looked at penalty minutes per game vs winning percentage in a scatter plot broken down by regular season and playoffs. Next, I created a boxplot that shows summaries of goal differential for each division in the NHL, playoff and regualar season combined. Third, I made a histogram that portrays the St. Louis Blues goalies' goals against in one game records, followed by a bar plot that shows the breakdown of records held by skaters (non-goalies) for the St. Louis Blues (*my favorite team*) by position. Lastly, I created several bar plots that portrayed regular season shootout win percentage and shutout percentage for all teams broken down into either conference or division.
 
 I did have a couple interesting findings in my exploratory data analysis. First, in my scatter plot looking at penalty minutes per game vs winning percentage, there seems to be a slight negative correlation (-.28) in the regular season, but flips to a slight positive correlation (.30) in the playoffs. In other words, it appears that there is a small indication that teams who are more aggressive and rough up their opponents have a better chance of winning in the playoffs. Next, For the bar plots looking at percentage of shutouts being wins, the Montreal Canadians, Columbus Blue Jackets, Nashville Predators, Chicago Blackhawks, and Boston Bruins had the only shutout percentages higher than 15% in the regular season. The Edmonton Oilers finished last place by quite a decent margin in this category. Lastly, looking at the bar plots that portrayed clutch performance, or teams with high OT shootout win percentages, the Colorado Avalanche of the Central division dominated, being the only team in the NHL to win over 60% of the time in their shootouts. Also, the Central division as a whole seemed to perform best in shootouts, while the Atlantic division was on the bottom of the list.
 
 Looking back, there is not too much I would have done differently, other than giving myself more time to focus on the data analysis part, because it was quite interesting once I was able to get a hold on the data. The most difficult part of the project for me was creating the functions and setting them to be able to take in numeric and character inputs from the user. My big takeaway for future projects is to seperate the project into blocks; I want to write out details and have a plan for each step instead of looking at the whole thing and trying to plan start to finish from the very beginning. Overall, it was enjoyable being able to actually use the R programming techniques on a project that dealt with sports. 
 
 [Again, here is a link to my Project 1 Github page](https://koltonw.github.io/ST558Project1/)
